docs/en/api-reference/peripherals/sdmmc_host.rst, before:

SDMMC Host Driver
=================

Overview
--------

On the ESP32, SDMMC host peripheral has two slots:

- Slot 0 (:c:macro:`SDMMC_HOST_SLOT_0`) is an 8-bit slot. It uses ``HS1_*`` signals in the PIN MUX.
- Slot 1 (:c:macro:`SDMMC_HOST_SLOT_1`) is a 4-bit slot. It uses ``HS2_*`` signals in the PIN MUX.

Pin mappings of these slots are given in the following table:

    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | Signal | Slot 0      | Slot 1      |
    +========+=============+=============+
    | CMD    | GPIO11      | GPIO15      |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | CLK    | GPIO6       | GPIO14      |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | D0     | GPIO7       | GPIO2       |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | D1     | GPIO8       | GPIO4       |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | D2     | GPIO9       | GPIO12      |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | D3     | GPIO10      | GPIO13      |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | D4     | GPIO16      |             |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | D5     | GPIO17      |             |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | D6     | GPIO5       |             |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | D7     | GPIO18      |             |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | CD     | any input via GPIO matrix |
    +--------+---------------------------+
    | WP     | any input via GPIO matrix |
    +--------+---------------------------+

Card Detect and Write Protect signals can be routed to arbitrary pins using GPIO matrix. To use these pins, set ``gpio_cd`` and ``gpio_wp`` members of :cpp:class:`sdmmc_slot_config_t` structure when calling :cpp:func:`sdmmc_host_init_slot`. Note that it is not advised to specify Card Detect pin when working with SDIO cards, because in ESP32 card detect signal can also trigger SDIO slave interrupt.

.. warning::
    
    Pins used by slot 0 (``HS1_*``) are also used to connect SPI flash chip in ESP-WROOM32 and ESP32-WROVER modules. These pins can not be shared between SD card and SPI flash. If you need to use Slot 0, connect SPI flash to different pins and set Efuses accordingly.


Using the SDMMC Host driver
---------------------------

Of all the funtions listed below, only :cpp:func:`sdmmc_host_init`, :cpp:func:`sdmmc_host_init_slot`, and :cpp:func:`sdmmc_host_deinit` will be used directly by most applications.

Other functions, such as :cpp:func:`sdmmc_host_set_bus_width`, :cpp:func:`sdmmc_host_set_card_clk`, and :cpp:func:`sdmmc_host_do_transaction` will be called by the SD/MMC protocol layer via function pointers in :cpp:class:`sdmmc_host_t` structure.

See also
--------

See :doc:`SD/SDIO/MMC Driver <../storage/sdmmc>` for the higher level driver which implements the protocol layer.

See :doc:`SD SPI Host Driver <sdspi_host>` for a similar driver which uses SPI controller and is limited to SPI mode of SD protocol.

API Reference
-------------

.. include:: /_build/inc/sdmmc_host.inc

Commit message:

doc(sdio_slave): add descriptions about conflicts on MTDI pin

docs/en/api-reference/peripherals/sdmmc_host.rst, after:

SDMMC Host Driver
=================

Overview
--------

On the ESP32, SDMMC host peripheral has two slots:

- Slot 0 (:c:macro:`SDMMC_HOST_SLOT_0`) is an 8-bit slot. It uses ``HS1_*`` signals in the PIN MUX.
- Slot 1 (:c:macro:`SDMMC_HOST_SLOT_1`) is a 4-bit slot. It uses ``HS2_*`` signals in the PIN MUX.

Pin mappings of these slots are given in the following table:

    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | Signal | Slot 0      | Slot 1      |
    +========+=============+=============+
    | CMD    | GPIO11      | GPIO15      |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | CLK    | GPIO6       | GPIO14      |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | D0     | GPIO7       | GPIO2       |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | D1     | GPIO8       | GPIO4       |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | D2     | GPIO9       | GPIO12      |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | D3     | GPIO10      | GPIO13      |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | D4     | GPIO16      |             |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | D5     | GPIO17      |             |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | D6     | GPIO5       |             |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | D7     | GPIO18      |             |
    +--------+-------------+-------------+
    | CD     | any input via GPIO matrix |
    +--------+---------------------------+
    | WP     | any input via GPIO matrix |
    +--------+---------------------------+

Card Detect and Write Protect signals can be routed to arbitrary pins using GPIO matrix. To use these pins, set ``gpio_cd`` and ``gpio_wp`` members of :cpp:class:`sdmmc_slot_config_t` structure when calling :cpp:func:`sdmmc_host_init_slot`. Note that it is not advised to specify Card Detect pin when working with SDIO cards, because in ESP32 card detect signal can also trigger SDIO slave interrupt.

.. warning::
    
    Pins used by slot 0 (``HS1_*``) are also used to connect SPI flash chip in ESP-WROOM32 and ESP32-WROVER modules. These pins can not be shared between SD card and SPI flash. If you need to use Slot 0, connect SPI flash to different pins and set Efuses accordingly.


Using the SDMMC Host driver
---------------------------

Of all the funtions listed below, only :cpp:func:`sdmmc_host_init`, :cpp:func:`sdmmc_host_init_slot`, and :cpp:func:`sdmmc_host_deinit` will be used directly by most applications.

Other functions, such as :cpp:func:`sdmmc_host_set_bus_width`, :cpp:func:`sdmmc_host_set_card_clk`, and :cpp:func:`sdmmc_host_do_transaction` will be called by the SD/MMC protocol layer via function pointers in :cpp:class:`sdmmc_host_t` structure.

See also
--------

See :doc:`SD/SDIO/MMC Driver <../storage/sdmmc>` for the higher level driver which implements the protocol layer.

See :doc:`SD SPI Host Driver <sdspi_host>` for a similar driver which uses SPI controller and is limited to SPI mode of SD protocol.

See :doc:`sd_pullup_requirements` for pullup support and compatiblities about modules and devkits.

API Reference
-------------

.. include:: /_build/inc/sdmmc_host.inc
